README.md, before:

# marvin Z80 monitor program
Marvin is a simple monitor program designed to work with the [BeanZee](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/BeanZee) Z80 development board and my earlier [breadboard computer](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/z80-breadboard-computer), but it should be easy to adapt for other Z80 hardware.  

BeanZee is a board for experimentation and learning. The primary function of Marvin is to be able to load,  execute Z80 programs on BeanZee - programs that typically have been written and cross-assembled or cross-compiled on a host computer.

Marvin builds with:  
[sjasmplus](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus)  
[z88dk-z80asm](https://github.com/z88dk/z88dk/wiki/Tool---z80asm)  

See also [PainfulDiodes Blog post](https://painfuldiodes.wordpress.com/2025/03/02/marvin-v1/)

Example programs to run on BeanZee can be found in [BeanZeeBytes](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/BeanZeeBytes)

## Using Marvin with BeanZee

The BeanZee board has 32k RAM and 32k ROM. Marvin (and other potential firmware) is loaded into the ROM. The top 4k of the RAM is reserved for system use (which currently is just the stack and an input buffer), but the remainder of the RAM is available for user programs.  

BeanZee has an FTDI USB interface for communication with a host computer using a terminal emulator.

Memory map:  
0000 - 7FFF : 32k ROM  
8000 - FFFF : 32k RAM  

Stack starts at top of RAM (FFFF) (working down)  
Input buffer starts at bottom of system RAM (F000) 

8000-EFFF is available for user progams.

Marvin expects to find an [FTDI UM245R USB to Parallel FIFO Development Module](https://ftdichip.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/DS_UM245R.pdf) at ports 0 and 1:

Port 0 : status (read only)  
Port 1 : data (read / write)   

Status byte:  
Bit 0 : device ready for data to be written (active low)  
Bit 1 : data available in read buffer (active low)  

## Basic interaction

When BeanZee is reset it responds with a Marvin welcome message and a prompt:

    MARVIN
    A super simple monitor program for Z80 homebrew
    (c) Stephen Willcock 2024
    https://github.com/PainfulDiodes
    >

Commands are sent character by character, and Marvin waits for a new line character (\n) before processing a command. Marvin ignores carriage return (\r) characters.

The usual options for end-of-line are: \n, \r\n and \r.

\r on its own is not commonly seen and so for simplicity this option is not currently supported by Marvin.

Again for simplicity, backspace for correcting a command is also not currently supported. However, hitting the escape key (\e) is recognised and it will cause everything on the current line to be ignored, and move to a new line and new prompt.

Whitespace on a command is also ignored. This allows for very compact commands, or for commands to be spaced out to make them easier to read.

Values are entered in hexadecimal (no prefix or suffix) and upper or lower case letters may be used for these values.

There are a handful of commands, most of them use a single letter, and these single-letter commands are case-sensitive.

## r command

The (r)ead command will read 16 bytes from memory and output the values to the console:

    >r
    0000: 31 ff ff c3 2a 00 db 00 cb 4f 20 fa db 01 c9 c5 

The r command uses a memory cursor which is initially reset to zero – so the first “r” after a reset will start reading from address zero – where Marvin is located.

The cursor will move forward with subsequent reads:

    >r
    0000: 31 ff ff c3 2a 00 db 00 cb 4f 20 fa db 01 c9 c5 
    >r
    0010: 47 db 00 cb 47 20 fa 78 d3 01 c1 c9 e5 7e fe 00 
    >r
    0020: 28 06 d3 01 23 c3 1d 00 e1 c9 11 00 00 21 77 01 
    >

You can also specify a memory location as a parameter after the r command, this will move the cursor to the address you provide:

    >r001a
    001a: c1 c9 e5 7e fe 00 28 06 d3 01 23 c3 1d 00 e1 c9 
    >r
    002a: 11 00 00 21 77 01 cd 1c 00 21 00 80 3e 3e cd 0f 
    >

As whitespace is ignored – “r001a” and “r 001a” are treated the same.

You can alternatively specify just the upper address byte to start reading from:

    >r02
    0200: 64 0a 00 4e 6f 20 64 61 74 61 20 74 6f 20 77 72 
    >

## x command

The e(x)ecute command causes the CPU to jump to and continue executing from a given address. In the example, the command is to execute from address zero, which is where Marvin starts, so Marvin initialises:

    >r00
    0000: 31 ff ff c3 2a 00 db 00 cb 4f 20 fa db 01 c9 c5 
    >x0000
    MARVIN
    A super simple monitor program for Z80 homebrew
    (c) Stephen Willcock 2024
    https://github.com/PainfulDiodes
    >

## w command

The (w)rite command will write a number of bytes from the console into a given memory location.
The start (hex) address has to be provided after the w and then subsequent hex pairs are interpreted as a sequence of values to be written to consecutive addresses. The command

    w 8000 3e 0a d3 01 3e

will write

    Addr Value
    ---- -----
    8000 3e
    8001 0a
    8002 d3
    8003 01
    8004 3e

An entire program could be entered into memory using this command.

## : command

The Marvin load (:) command accepts data in Intel HEX format. Each command (line / record) is treated independently and like the w command it will write data to memory.

Intel HEX uses a colon to mark the beginning of a record and so we use the colon character to specify the load command.

A sample Intel HEX file:

    :109000003E0AD3013E48D3013E65D3013E6CD301F5
    :109010003E6CD3013E6FD3013E21D3013E0AD30102
    :05902000D301C30000B4
    :00000001FF

Taking the first line:  

* 10 is the number of data bytes being sent (in hex) – 16 bytes in this case
* 9000 is the load address (in hex)  
* 00 is the record type – which is “data”  
* 3E0AD3013E48D3013E65D3013E6CD301 is the actual data to be loaded (in hex)  
* F5 is a checksum that can be used to test the integrity of the data  

A program prepared as an Intel HEX format file may be loaded into memory by sending the file via a terminal emulator, and then it can be executed using the x command. Each line of the file is taken as a command, and hence the prompt “>” appears as each line is processed:

    MARVIN
    A super simple monitor program for Z80 homebrew
    (c) Stephen Willcock 2024
    https://github.com/PainfulDiodes

    >:109000003E0AD3013E48D3013E65D3013E6CD301F5
    >:109010003E6CD3013E6FD3013E21D3013E0AD30102
    >:05902000D301C30000B4
    >:00000001FF
    >x 9000

    Hello!


Marvin only supports a subset of the Intel HEX specification. For example:  

* Marvin does not accept anything before the “:” on a line (apart from whitespace which is ignored)
* Only the Intel HEX “data” record type is recognised
* The Intel HEX format uses a checksum for validating data integrity – this is ignored by Marvin
* As the command is interpreted and executed without checksum validation, if a record is truncated, then any complete bytes of data already received will be written to memory

## z88dk-appmake

z88dk-appmake from the https://github.com/z88dk/z88dk tool set takes compiled or assembled binaries and prepares them for specific target environments. This tool supports creation of Intel HEX files, for example:

    z88dk-appmake +hex --org 0x8000 -b myprogram.bin -o myprogram.hex

Note the “org” option is used to add the load address for each row.

z88dk-appmake can therefore prepare Intel HEX files that can be sent to Marvin for loading.

## BeanZeeBytes
Example programs that can be loaded and run on BeanZee can be found in [BeanZeeBytes](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/BeanZeeBytes).

Commit message:

Make z88dk the default build.sh
Update README.md
and rename shell script

README.md, after:

# marvin Z80 monitor program
Marvin is a simple monitor program designed to work with the [BeanZee](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/BeanZee) Z80 development board and my earlier [breadboard computer](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/z80-breadboard-computer), but it should be easy to adapt for other Z80 hardware.  

BeanZee is a board for experimentation and learning. The primary function of Marvin is to be able to load,  execute Z80 programs on BeanZee - programs that typically have been written and cross-assembled or cross-compiled on a host computer.

Marvin builds with:  
[z88dk-z80asm](https://github.com/z88dk/z88dk/wiki/Tool---z80asm) (default), or  
[sjasmplus](https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus)  

See also [PainfulDiodes Blog post](https://painfuldiodes.wordpress.com/2025/03/02/marvin-v1/)

Example programs to run on BeanZee can be found in [BeanZeeBytes](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/BeanZeeBytes)

## Using Marvin with BeanZee

The BeanZee board has 32k RAM and 32k ROM. Marvin (and other potential firmware) is loaded into the ROM. The top 4k of the RAM is reserved for system use (which currently is just the stack and an input buffer), but the remainder of the RAM is available for user programs.  

BeanZee has an FTDI USB interface for communication with a host computer using a terminal emulator.

Memory map:  
0000 - 7FFF : 32k ROM  
8000 - FFFF : 32k RAM  

Stack starts at top of RAM (FFFF) (working down)  
Input buffer starts at bottom of system RAM (F000) 

8000-EFFF is available for user progams.

Marvin expects to find an [FTDI UM245R USB to Parallel FIFO Development Module](https://ftdichip.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/DS_UM245R.pdf) at ports 0 and 1:

Port 0 : status (read only)  
Port 1 : data (read / write)   

Status byte:  
Bit 0 : device ready for data to be written (active low)  
Bit 1 : data available in read buffer (active low)  

## Basic interaction

When BeanZee is reset it responds with a Marvin welcome message and a prompt:

    MARVIN
    A super simple monitor program for Z80 homebrew
    (c) Stephen Willcock 2024
    https://github.com/PainfulDiodes
    >

Commands are sent character by character, and Marvin waits for a new line character (\n) before processing a command. Marvin ignores carriage return (\r) characters.

The usual options for end-of-line are: \n, \r\n and \r.

\r on its own is not commonly seen and so for simplicity this option is not currently supported by Marvin.

Again for simplicity, backspace for correcting a command is also not currently supported. However, hitting the escape key (\e) is recognised and it will cause everything on the current line to be ignored, and move to a new line and new prompt.

Whitespace on a command is also ignored. This allows for very compact commands, or for commands to be spaced out to make them easier to read.

Values are entered in hexadecimal (no prefix or suffix) and upper or lower case letters may be used for these values.

There are a handful of commands, most of them use a single letter, and these single-letter commands are case-sensitive.

## r command

The (r)ead command will read 16 bytes from memory and output the values to the console:

    >r
    0000: 31 ff ff c3 2a 00 db 00 cb 4f 20 fa db 01 c9 c5 

The r command uses a memory cursor which is initially reset to zero – so the first “r” after a reset will start reading from address zero – where Marvin is located.

The cursor will move forward with subsequent reads:

    >r
    0000: 31 ff ff c3 2a 00 db 00 cb 4f 20 fa db 01 c9 c5 
    >r
    0010: 47 db 00 cb 47 20 fa 78 d3 01 c1 c9 e5 7e fe 00 
    >r
    0020: 28 06 d3 01 23 c3 1d 00 e1 c9 11 00 00 21 77 01 
    >

You can also specify a memory location as a parameter after the r command, this will move the cursor to the address you provide:

    >r001a
    001a: c1 c9 e5 7e fe 00 28 06 d3 01 23 c3 1d 00 e1 c9 
    >r
    002a: 11 00 00 21 77 01 cd 1c 00 21 00 80 3e 3e cd 0f 
    >

As whitespace is ignored – “r001a” and “r 001a” are treated the same.

You can alternatively specify just the upper address byte to start reading from:

    >r02
    0200: 64 0a 00 4e 6f 20 64 61 74 61 20 74 6f 20 77 72 
    >

## x command

The e(x)ecute command causes the CPU to jump to and continue executing from a given address. In the example, the command is to execute from address zero, which is where Marvin starts, so Marvin initialises:

    >r00
    0000: 31 ff ff c3 2a 00 db 00 cb 4f 20 fa db 01 c9 c5 
    >x0000
    MARVIN
    A super simple monitor program for Z80 homebrew
    (c) Stephen Willcock 2024
    https://github.com/PainfulDiodes
    >

## w command

The (w)rite command will write a number of bytes from the console into a given memory location.
The start (hex) address has to be provided after the w and then subsequent hex pairs are interpreted as a sequence of values to be written to consecutive addresses. The command

    w 8000 3e 0a d3 01 3e

will write

    Addr Value
    ---- -----
    8000 3e
    8001 0a
    8002 d3
    8003 01
    8004 3e

An entire program could be entered into memory using this command.

## : command

The Marvin load (:) command accepts data in Intel HEX format. Each command (line / record) is treated independently and like the w command it will write data to memory.

Intel HEX uses a colon to mark the beginning of a record and so we use the colon character to specify the load command.

A sample Intel HEX file:

    :109000003E0AD3013E48D3013E65D3013E6CD301F5
    :109010003E6CD3013E6FD3013E21D3013E0AD30102
    :05902000D301C30000B4
    :00000001FF

Taking the first line:  

* 10 is the number of data bytes being sent (in hex) – 16 bytes in this case
* 9000 is the load address (in hex)  
* 00 is the record type – which is “data”  
* 3E0AD3013E48D3013E65D3013E6CD301 is the actual data to be loaded (in hex)  
* F5 is a checksum that can be used to test the integrity of the data  

A program prepared as an Intel HEX format file may be loaded into memory by sending the file via a terminal emulator, and then it can be executed using the x command. Each line of the file is taken as a command, and hence the prompt “>” appears as each line is processed:

    MARVIN
    A super simple monitor program for Z80 homebrew
    (c) Stephen Willcock 2024
    https://github.com/PainfulDiodes

    >:109000003E0AD3013E48D3013E65D3013E6CD301F5
    >:109010003E6CD3013E6FD3013E21D3013E0AD30102
    >:05902000D301C30000B4
    >:00000001FF
    >x 9000

    Hello!


Marvin only supports a subset of the Intel HEX specification. For example:  

* Marvin does not accept anything before the “:” on a line (apart from whitespace which is ignored)
* Only the Intel HEX “data” record type is recognised
* The Intel HEX format uses a checksum for validating data integrity – this is ignored by Marvin
* As the command is interpreted and executed without checksum validation, if a record is truncated, then any complete bytes of data already received will be written to memory

## z88dk-appmake

z88dk-appmake from the https://github.com/z88dk/z88dk tool set takes compiled or assembled binaries and prepares them for specific target environments. This tool supports creation of Intel HEX files, for example:

    z88dk-appmake +hex --org 0x8000 -b myprogram.bin -o myprogram.hex

Note the “org” option is used to add the load address for each row.

z88dk-appmake can therefore prepare Intel HEX files that can be sent to Marvin for loading.

For this reason, although the project has been adapted to assemble using either sjasmplus or z88dk-z80asm, z88dk is the default.

## BeanZeeBytes
Example programs that can be loaded and run on BeanZee can be found in [BeanZeeBytes](https://github.com/PainfulDiodes/BeanZeeBytes).
